---
layout: post
title: JavaScript, types, and stuff
---

Part of the beauty of JavaScript that people like Douglas Crockford
[expound](https://youtu.be/ya4UHuXNygM?list=PLgEN6Yip8UBKt4j7_KJhhAMnggkA-5svC)
is that the 'good parts' of the language are a small, orthogonal, and
extremely expressive set of constructs.
After removing some unnecessary bad parts of ES5 we get just a few keywords:
`this`,
`function/return`,
`var`,
`delete`,
`switch/case/break`(?),
`if/else`,
`while/do while`, and
`typeof`.
(The keyword `for` may be used but only in libraries to provide functionality
such as `_.each` and `_.range`.)

For example, `new` (and `.prototype`) are unnecessary, since constructors
can be thought of as merely functions that return objects... but all JS
functions return objects... and object inheritance can be handled very simply
among regular functions as well.
Crockford uses this snippet as an example of typical JS pseudoclassical
inheritance using constructors and prototypes:

    function Gizmo(id) {
      this.id = id;
    }
    Gizmo.prototype.toString = function() {
      return "gizmo " + this.id;
    };

    function Hoozit(id) {
      this.id = id;
    }
    Hoozit.prototype = new Gizmo();
    Hoozit.prototype.text = function(id) {
      return this.id === id;
    };

And he shows the much nicer alternative using simpler functional inheritance:

    var gizmo = function(id) {
      return {
        id: id,
        toString: function() {
          return 'gizmo ' + this.id;
        }
      };
    }

    var hoozit(id) = function() {
      var that = gizmo(id);
      that.test = function(testid) {
        return testid === this.id;
      };
      return that;
    }
    // alternatively:
    var hoozit(id) = _.create(
      gizmo(id),
      {
        test: function(testid) {
          return testid === this.id;
        }
      }
    );

There is a good subset of JS that is simple so it
can be well understood by programmers and is powerful enough to to build up
whatever arbitrarily complex constructs are desired through metaprogramming and
idiom conventions.
"You can simulate the classical language in the prototypal language, you
can't do the other.
Java is not powerful enough that you can write in a JavaScript style in
Java, it's just not good enough. ...
JavaScript is the more powerful of the models," says Crockford.

So if JS is so comprehensible and powerful, what are the problems it still has?

> [Anders Hejlsberg](https://channel9.msdn.com/Events/Lang-NEXT/Lang-NEXT-2012/Panel-Web-and-Cloud-Programming):
> We can all wonder about how we do medium to large scale efficient development
> [in JavaScript].
>
> Erik Meijer:
> Are you implying that you cannot write big programs in JavaScript?
>
> Anders:
> No, I think you can but I don't think you can maintain them.

What makes JS deficient in this regard?
The Dart and TypeScript projects were explicitly created to make it easier
to maintain large programs for JS platforms.

The issue I'll look at in this post is that in a large unfamiliar JS project,
programmers may come across functions and not know what they do.
In general, one can understand a function by reading it, but that's slow so
we need abstract summaries that specify the function semantics.
Thinking mathematically, the first step here is to give the function's
domain and range, and normally this is where types come in.
In Java, at least there's a type signature with the types defined somewhere
else as classes, but in JS, you'll just get parameter names and JSDoc.
(JSDoc supports [parameter properties](http://usejsdoc.org/tags-param.html#parameters-with-properties)
but if multiple functions take the same type of parameter they must be
listed again before every function.)
At this point you might consider checking out Hejlsberg's TypeScript, but
let's consider whether type annotations are needed and whether JS can actually
provide them.

> I must say that I consider types [in mathematical logic] to be something of a
> hack.
> And indeed I have always felt that the related idea of "data types" has
> very much served to hold up the long-term development of  programming
> languages.
> (Mathematica, for example, gets great flexibility precisely from
> avoiding the use of types.)
>
> -- [Stephen Wolfram](http://blog.stephenwolfram.com/2010/11/100-years-since-principia-mathematica/)

As Gabriel Dos Reis [remarks](http://research.microsoft.com/apps/video/default.aspx?id=192429&r=1),
types in computer algebra languages can seem unnatural since semantic properties
of expressions are difficult to determine even at runtime (e.g. is this
expression semantically a complex polynomial in `x`?), some expressions
may never get evaluated, etc..
However, Mathematica (a.k.a. the Wolfram Language) does provide a direct way
to define functions on restricted domains using patterns:

    (* this function is defined on the integers *)
    f[x_Integer] := x^2;

    (* this function is defined on strings *)
    g[str_String] := StringLength@str;

    (* this function is defined on odd prime numbers *)
    h[p_?(OddQ[#] && PrimeQ[#]&)] := (p + 1) / 2;

JS has an `eval` function, so static checking is never going to be complete,
but we can give ourselves the challenge of specifying the domain and range of
JS functions using built-in syntax.
Note that the obvious way to specify a set in terms of functions is using
a predicate.
Imagining we want to define a JS function from prime numbers to integers, we
can use a wrapper `PRED` and write some predicates:

    var PRED = function(prerequisites, predicate) {
      return function(x) {
        _.each(prerequisites, function(prerequisite) {
          if (!prerequisite(x)) return false;
        });
        return predicate(x);
      }
    };

    var isInteger = PRED(
      // prerequisites: (none)
      [],
      function(x) {
        // return truthy iff `x` is an integer
        ...
    });

    var isPrime = PRED(
      // prerequisites: integer
      [ isInteger ],
      function(x) {
        // now we know `x` is an integer, continue with primality test
        ...
    });

Here `isY(x)` returns truthy iff `x` is a `Y`, and we see that inheritance
is expressed in terms of 'prerequisites'.
The function `isInteger` could 'inherit' from `isNumber`, etc..

Now we just have to include predicates for the input and output of a function
in the function expression somehow, so that ideally computers and humans
can see what's going on.

One possibility is to define a special wrapper `SPEC`:

    var SPEC = function(inputPredicates, outputPredicate, fun) {
      return function() {
        _.each(_.zip(arguments, inputPredicates), function(pair) {
          var arg = pair[0];
          var pred = pair[1];
          assert(pred(arg));
        });
        var ret = fun.apply(this, args);
        if(assert(outputPredicate(ret)) {
          return ret;
        }
      };
    };

Then we can write the following function

    var incPrime = SPEC(
      // input predicates
      [isPrime],
      // output predicate
      isInteger,

    funtion(p) {
      return p + 1;
    });

and tell at a glance from the `SPEC` that `incPrime` takes one argument, a
prime number, and returns an integer.
Of course, the `assert`s in `SPEC` would only run in debug/test mode
unless we want to be really defensive.
What remains is to develop a tool that detects `SPEC`s and provides
autocomplete in editors.
With further conventions, such as using a `hasProperties` argument in
`PRED` listing properties the object must have, such a tool could be more
useful.
So JS has power to do lots of things we want to do but without adopting
some arbitrary conventions, static information is still quite hard.
(JSDoc is a similar arbitrary convention that some tools parse.)

