---
layout: post
title: "Intellectual hipsters on academia"
---

One contrarian, or meta-contrarian, view of academia claims that it optimizes
for the wrong things: that academic status is arbitrary, driven by stodgy
traditions and narrow-mindedness. My proposition is that, at the margins, this
is overblown or just naive, and that academia is and has been adequate for even
unconventional research problems.

Naivety is understandable. In boxing there's a large gap between the skills of
an amateur and those of a pro. Amateur intellectuals often make a great deal of
noise in the wider culture, but in academia the professionals do their work.
It's easy to underestimate the scope of anything unfamiliar, and getting
familiar with academia takes lengthy study.

Bubbling to the top of academia requires surviving a long process of filtering
out bad ideas. Two important things are learned: the ability to execute
research that passes these tests and a new perspective from which to view
others' work which did or did not make the grade. Yes, getting published in a
good journal actually is highly correlated with research quality and value.
Imperfections do exist but mostly in the direction of including too much
obsolete research rather than excluding new ideas.

The conclusion is that yes, reputed academic publications, positions, awards,
etc. really mean something, and in general academia is the appropriate place
for applied mathematics fields or other sciences (and applied math fields are
the appropriate place for a lot of "philosophy", a.k.a. modeling and
meta-modeling with axiomatic assumptions). PhDs are the appropriate training
process. Mainstream science really is all it was cracked up to be.

