---
layout: post
title: JavaScript, types, and stuff 2
---

[A follow up and resolution of [part 1](http://amacfie.github.io/2015/08/16/js_type/)]

In mathematics, functions are defined with a domain and codomain.
If you're writing a function in a programming language you might want
to specify the intended domain and codomain too.
So you need a way of expressing a set of objects.
It would be nice if these definitions could stay DRY using inheritance
(defining subsets, roughly speaking) and have built-in syntax.
The solution is
[data types](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_type#Definition_of_a_.22type.22)
as defined as "value spaces".

In JS, the standard way to define (custom) types is using constructors
and prototypes (in ES6 there's the `class` sugar).
_Pace_ Crockford, prototypal inheritance gives more static information
than functional inheritance, and we can use `instanceof` dynamically.
The `class` keyword makes the syntax acceptable.

Type annotations can be written
in JSDoc, which editor tools such as Tern can use for autocompletion, etc..
We could call this
JS in typed mode.
TypeScript and Flow are similar but the annotations
are a modification of the language.

One notable caveat is that JavaScript is weakly typed, and a function
parameter may
obey the given type annotation initially but then be mutated in the function
body and no longer really have that type for the rest of the body, despite what
`instanceof` and `.constructor` say.
A constructor or its prototype may get mutated at runtime, too.
A convention could be "don't do this".

