---
layout: post
title: "The 'Berge equilibrium' and related concepts: Mostly negative modeling results"
---

Abstract: Some obscure solution concepts in game theory are investigated and
critiqued

<!-- justification or lack thereof for BE -->

Consider a game $$G$$ with a set $$N = [1..n]$$ of players.
For each $$i\in N$$, $$S_i$$ is the set of (pure) strategies of player $$i$$,
and $$u_i$$ is the utility function of player $$i$$ defined for each profile
$$s=(s_1, \ldots, s_n)$$.
We refer to $$N \setminus \{i\}$$ simply as $$-i$$.

The following "solution concept" has been defined somewhere in the literature.
A strategy profile $$s^*$$ is called a _Berge equilibrium (BE)_ iff for all
$$i$$ and $$s_{-i}\in S_{-i}$$

$$
  u_{i}(s^*_i, s_{-i}) \le u_{i}(s^*).
$$

That is, given the strategy selected by each player $$i$$, the opponents $$-i$$
choose a joint strategy $$s^*_{-i}$$ that maximizes $$u_i$$.

Solution concepts in game theory express rationality.
The Nash equilibrium (NE) is justified in non-cooperative game theory as
follows.
Assume a profile $$s^*$$ is called the "solution" but $$s^*$$ is not an NE.
Since it is the solution, the opponents $$-i$$ follow $$s^*$$.
But then some player $$i$$ would be irrational not to unilaterally deviate.
So rational solutions must be NEs.
The BE cannot be similarly justified because it involves increasing the utility
of other players, which is arational.
(There is also talk of the BE modeling altruism but preferences such as
altruism are dealt with by utility functions, not solution concepts.
If we assume the players only know each other's objective payoffs and don't
know their utility functions even probabilistically, we get into bounded
rationality issues that are outside my scope.)

Cooperative solution concepts, such as Nash bargaining for normal forms and
the Shapley value for characteristic function forms are justified in perhaps
vaguer terms, so _maybe_ the BE could be accepted as a cooperative solution.
Examples of cooperative games could help confirm or deny this.
One reason to be skeptical is that player $$i$$ would prefer all of $$s$$ to
maximize $$u_i$$, not just $$s_{-i}$$.
Cooperative solutions are about picking an outcome as a group.
Question: Is it resistant to utility "misreporting"?

With the above conclusions, I'm not interested in studying the BE model
further.

<hr />

<!-- presentation of AE which has similar definition but has practical
  pros/cons relative to BE -->

For some reason, I explored a related "solution concept" and made a few notes
on its appropriateness and practicality.

A BE does not alway exist, even in finite games.
A different but similar equilibrium avoids this
if we assume transferrable utilities:
We define an _AE_ as an NE in the transformed game
where the new utility functions $$v_i$$ are given by $$v_i = \sum_{j \neq i} u_j$$.
So, in the AE, players maximize the sum of payoffs to others instead of
each player's opponents maximizing its payoffs.
Clearly AE has similar existence properties to NE (an improvement over BE).

Presumably the AE is also the result of perfectly altruistic players, where
the functions $$u_i$$ give "objective payoffs".
We do not give connections to the altruism literature here.

So existence is nicer for AE than BE but what about computational complexity?
The set of BEs of a game can be found by computing the intersection of NEs of
$$n$$ similar-sized 2-player games ($$n$$ is much smaller than the game).
So for normal forms we might not expect much of a speedup.
For extensive forms, it depends whether there is a backward-induction-like
algorithm for BEs that avoids exponential blowup.

If you define a subgame-perfect BE as one that's a BE for every subgame, you
can easily find an efficient algorithm to check but it's a very strong
condition. In particular it requires that every subgame has a BE.

If you simply want an algorithm to check if an extensive form has a BE, it's
not so clear.
I considered forming the $$n$$ similar-sized 2-player games and taking the
intersection of the subgame perfect NEs, but that isn't enough.
There may be extensive forms with BEs but for which the intersection of the
2-player subgame perfect NEs is empty [example available].
So you have to take the intersection of all 2-player NEs, not just subgame
perfect ones.

Other modeling issues show up, however, with AE.
E.g. AE in general violates the "group rationality" condition of Kaldor-Hicks
efficiency and the outcome is not an imputation.

The BE may be a natural concept from a purely mathematical viewpoint but, in
the words of Shubik, "no consideration is given to applications to economics".

