---
layout: post
title: "Qs"
---

(I'm not suggesting that these are unsolved.)

Should job candidates place conditional bets on how productive they’d be if
hired?

Should children be able to sue parents if they divorce, give birth out of
wedlock, etc?

Should someone start selling insurance against online mob victimization and
other “life/career ruining” reputation attacks?

How should a country transition to [futarchy](http://mason.gmu.edu/~rhanson/futarchy.html),
if it starts with a highly corrupt government?

People have a tendency, perhaps intentional, to claim that policies themselves,
rather than the policies’ apparent goals, are axiomatic good things.
Is this a vulnerability in futarchy, since then they would be voted on as
values rather than bet on as beliefs?

Why is betting psychologically safe in finance (that is, trading) but dangerous
in casinos? As binary options are prone to fraud according to Wikipedia, what
does that say about the viability of prediction markets?

How should we apply and evaluate informal models? E.g. Jordan Peterson and
Stephen Wolfram have grand, general “theories of everything” which
are criticized for being essentially unfalsifiable; being informal/subjective,
are they useless? If we can’t directly bet on a claim because it’s too
abstract, what do we do with it?

The fact that classical utilitarianism and preference utilitarianism are
different is an example of how my preferences for you might not be the same as
your preferences for yourself. Could an explanation for paternalism be that the
government has different preferences about citizens’ lives than the citizens
do?

If the health system is inefficient, how much of the problem is caused by
doctors (and their guilds)? Similarly for legal system and lawyers.

Why are "theories" helpful in science but "ideologies" unhelpful in politics?

Was Julian Simon right? What is the real relationship between population and
GDP in the short and long run?

People from Bertrand Russell to Tyler Cowen and Peter Thiel have remarked on
increasing societal risk/change aversion and the concomitant stagnation -- what
is best to reboot “dynamism”: Move to a different country? Reform the current
one? Seasteading? Form more-dynamic enclave within the country? Work in
digital/crypto realm? Is this a [farmer-forager](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2010/10/fear-made-farmers.html)
issue? Can foragers be dynamic?

If [certain mental traits](https://www.primalpoly.com/the-mating-mind) are
Zahavian signals that indicate computational resources, does this predict
asymmetry in cognitive abilities between the sex that signals and the sex that
chooses, assuming $$P \neq NP$$?


