---
layout: post
title: Mathematical beauty and the Zero Prime project
---

Quotes, quotes, quotes:

>Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme beauty -- a
>beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture, without appeal to any part of
>our weaker nature, without the gorgeous trappings of painting or music, yet
>sublimely pure, and capable of a stern perfection such as only the greatest art
>can show. 
>
>-Bertrand Russell, Mysticism and Logic: And Other Essays

>Proclus, an ancient Greek philosopher, said:
>
>>This therefore, is mathematics: she reminds you of the invisible forms of
>>the soul; she gives life to  her own discoveries; she awakens the mind and
>>purifies the intellect; she brings to light our intrinsic ideas; she abolishes
>>oblivion and ignorance which are ours by birth...
>
>But I just like  mathematics because it is fun.
>
>-Terence Tao, [Solving Mathematical Problems][taoso]

Both of these quotes contain something that I myself feel.
I enjoy the austere minimalism of mathematics as a pure formal
science:
It is a simple yet vast and difficult, epistemically indubious otherworld.
On the other hand, "beautiful" is not a word I would use to describe 
mathematics very often; I more commonly describe a mathematical result crudely
as "cool" or "awesome" and I indeed feel that those words are more appropriate.

Aside from whether and how mathematics as a whole is beautiful, one can analyze
the beauty of individual mathematical theorems and proofs.

Schmidhuber provides a [powerful theory][schmid] of beauty in the eyes of
physical agents.
In Section 2.3 he summarizes,
"Generally speaking, among several sub-patterns classified as *comparable* by
a given observer, the subjectively most beautiful is the one with the simplest
(shortest) description, given the observer's current particular method for
encoding and memorizing it."
I believe Schmidhuber's theory has wide applicability, but perhaps there are
some issues with applying it to mathematics (as always, do correct me if I'm
wrong).
Consider the following:
Perhaps, for some theorem $$t$$, the proof of $$t$$ with lowest Kolmogorov
complexity is simply the one found by the algorithm "start from some axioms and
enumerate all proofs until a proof of $$t$$ is found".
The Komogorov complexity of a theorem is certainly not always related to its
beauty.
(See [this page][l] for more on the difference between physical agents and
formal problem solvers, which may be related to these issues.)

A possibly-related theory is that what makes a theorem or proof beautiful is its
usefulness for proving further theorems.
For example, proving a difficult but simple theorem is useful because its
difficulty means it may imply other previously difficult theorems, and its
simplicity means it may show up and be used often.
A theorem that establishes a connection between two previously disparate areas
of mathematics is considered beautiful.
Such a connection allows knowledge from one are to be applied to the other,
potentially cracking new problems.
An unexpected proof offers something new to be learned -- something that can
then be used for other problems.
The purpose of this post is to note the fun fact that according to this theory,
analyzing [ZPAs][zpa] is the same as computing the mathematical beauty they
contain.


[l]: http://amacfie.github.io/ZeroPrime/logicaluncertainty.html
[schmid]: http://arxiv.org/abs/0812.4360v2
[taoso]: http://amzn.com/B00BEAYB32
[zpa]: http://amacfie.github.io/ZeroPrime/genprobs.html
